.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.so config.so
.TH PAM_LDAPHOME 8 "April 4, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pam_ldaphome \- create and populate user home directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpam_ldaphome\fR\
 [\fBconfig=\fIFILE\fR]\
 [\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]]\
 [\fBwaitdebug\fR]\
 [\fBaudit\fR]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
For each login attempt, checks if the home directory for that user
exists, and if not, creates it.  The created directory is populated
with files taken from a specified \fIskeleton directory\fR.  The
file \fB.ssh/authorized_keys\fR is created and populated with
\fBSSH\fR public keys for that user, obtained from an LDAP database.
.PP
If home directory already exists, \fBpam_ldaphome\fR checks if 
contents of the \fB.ssh/authorized_keys\fR have diverged from the
LDAP database and synchronizes it if so.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration is kept in the file
.BR \*(ET/pam_ldaphome.conf .
The file is a usual UNIX-style configuration file with
comments introduced by the \fB#\fR character.  Long statements can be
split across several physical lines of text by ending each line but
the last with a backslash character. 
.PP
Available configuration directives are:
.TP
.BI allow\-home\-dir " PATH"
Lists directories in which it is allowed to create home directories.
\fIPATH\fR is a list of directories separated by colons.  The user's
home directory will be created only if the directory part of its name
is listed in \fIPATH\fR.
.TP
.BI skel " DIR"
Supplies the name of a \fIskeleton directory\fR.  The contents of this
directory is copied to each newly created user home directory.  The
file modes and permissions are retained.
.TP
.BI uri " ARG"
Sets the URI of the LDAP server to consult for the user profile.
.TP
.BI ldap\-version " NUM"
Sets the LDAP version to use.  Valid arguments are
.B 2 
and
.B 3
(the default).
.TP
.BI base " SEARCHBASE"
Use \fISEARCHBASE\fR as starting point for searches.
.TP
.BI binddn " DN"
Use the Distinguished Name \fIDB\fR to bind to the LDAP directory.
.TP
.BI bindpw " PASSWORD"
Used together with \fBbinddn\fR, this statement supplies the
password for simple authentication.
.TP
.BI bindpwfile " FILE"
Read password for simple authentication from \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
.BI tls " VAL"
Controls whether TLS is desired or required.  If \fIVAL\fR is
\fBno\fR (the default), TLS will not be used.  If it is \fByes\fR,
the module will issue the \fIStartTLS\fR command, but will continue
anyway if it fails.  Finally, if \fIVAL\fR is the word \fBonly\fR, the
use of TLS becomes mandatory, and the module will not establish LDAP
connection unless \fIStartTLS\fR succeeds.
.TP
.BI min\-uid " N"
Sets the minimal UID.  For users with UIDs less than \fIN\fR,
\fBpam_ldaphome\fR will return \fBPAM_SUCCESS\fR immediately.  This
allows you to have a set of basic users whose credentials are kept in
the system database and who will not be disturbed by
\fBpam_ldaphome\fR.  See also \fBmin\-gid\fR and \fBallow\-groups\fR.
.TP
.BI min\-gid " N"
Sets the minimal GID.  For users with GIDs less than \fIN\fR,
the module will return \fBPAM_SUCCESS\fR immediately.
.TP
\fBallow\-groups\fR \fIGROUP\fR [\fIGROUP\fR...]
Only handle members of the listed groups.
.TP
.BI filter " EXPR"
Defines a LDAP filter expression which returns the user profile.  The
\fIEXPR\fR should conform to the string representation for search
filters as defined in RFC 4515.
.TP
.BI pubkey\-attr " TEXT"
Defines the name of the attribute that keeps user's public SSH key.
.TP
.BI copy\-buf\-size " N"
Sets the size of the buffer used to copy files from the skeleton
directory to the newly created home.  The default value is 16384 bytes.
.TP
.BI home\-dir\-mode " MODE"
Defines the file mode (octal) for creation of the user directories.
.TP
.BI keyfile\-mode " MODE"
Defines the file mode (octal) for creation of authorized keys files.
.TP
.BI authorized_keys " NAME"
Sets the pathname (relative to the home directory) for the authorized
keys file.  The default is \fB.ssh/authorized_keys\fR.  For normal
operation, this value must be the same as the value of
\fBAuthorizedKeysFile\fR variable in
.BR sshd_config (5).
Unless you change the latter, there's no need to edit it.
.TP
.BI initrc\-command " COMMAND"
Run \fICOMMAND\fR after populating the user home directory with
files from the skeleton directory.  The user login name is passed to
\fICOMMAND\fR as its argument.  Before invoking, the current working
directory is changed to the user home, standard input is closed, and
standard output is redirected to standard errror.

The command should exit with code 0 on success.  If it exits with a
non-zero code, PAM_SYSTEM_ERR will be reported.
.TP
.BI initrc-log " FILE"
Redirects standard output and error from the
\fBinitrc\-command\fR to \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
\fBinitrc\-environ\fR \fIENV\fR ...
Modifies the environment of \fBinitrc\-command\fR.

This statement takes one or more arguments.  Each argument can be one
of:
.RS +4
.TP
.BR \- " (a dash)"
Clear the environment.  This is understood only when used as the first
argument.
.TP
\fB\-\fINAME\fR
Unset the environment variable \fINAME\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\fINAME\fB=\fIVALUE\fR
Unset the environment variable \fINAME\fR only if it has the given \fIVALUE\fR.
.TP
.I NAME
Retain the environment variable \fINAME\fR.
.TP
\fINAME\fB=\fIVALUE\fR
Define environment variable \fINAME\fR to have given \fIVALUE\fR.
.TP
\fINAME\fB+=\fIVALUE\fR
Retain the variable \fINAME\fR and append \fIVALUE\fR to its existing
value.  If no such variable is present in the environment, it is
created. If \fIVALUE\fR begins with a punctuation character, this character 
is removed from it before the assignment.
.TP
\fINAME\fB=+\fIVALUE\fR
Retain variable \fINAME\fR and prepend \fIVALUE\fR to its existing
value.  If no such variable is present in the environment, it is
created.  If \fIVALUE\fR ends with a punctuation character, this character 
is removed from it before assignment.
.RE
The \fIVALUE\fR part can be enclosed in single or double quotes, in
which case the usual shell dequoting rules apply.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI config= FILE
Read configuration from \fIFILE\fR instead of
.nh
.na
.BR \*(ET/pam_ldaphome.conf .
.ad
.hy
.TP
\fBdebug\fR\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]
Set debugging level (0 <= \fINUMBER\fR <= 100).
.TP
\fBwaitdebug\fR
Wait for \fIN\fR seconds before starting up.  This option is intended
to facilitate attaching to the module with
.BR gdb (1).
It is available only if the package was configured with
the \fB\-\-enable\-debug\fR option.
.TP
\fBaudit\fR
Log auditing information.
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
.BR auth .
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_SUCCESS
Successful termination.
.TP
.B PAM_SERVICE_ERR
System error or error in configuration of the module.
.SH EXAMPLE
The aim of this configuration is to allow remote access via \fBsshd\fR to
users present only in the LDAP database, using ssh shared-key
authentication.  The user public keys are kept in the
.B grayPublicKey
attribute of his LDAP entry.  When a user logs in for the first time,
his home directory does not exist yet and consequently \fBsshd\fR is not able
to verify his key.  Therefore it falls back to the interactive
authentication (it is supposed, of course, that \fBUsePAM\fR is set to
\fByes\fR in the \fBsshd\fR configuration file).  The authentication
stage is supposed to create user home directory, populate the
\fB.ssh/authorized_keys\fR file with his public keys and present user
with a descriptive text prompting him to cancel his current
authentication attempt and retry it again.
.TP
.B PAM ssh stack configuration:
.EX
auth [success=ok try_again=1 default=die] pam_ldaphome.so 
auth [success=done ignore=ignore default=die] pam_unix.so
auth [default=die]  pam_echo.so file=/etc/ldaphome.txt
.EE
.TP
.B The configuration file (\*(ET/pam_ldaphome.conf)
The configuration handles only users with uids and gids greater than
or equal to 1000 and pertaining to the group \fBremote\fR.  Home
directories are populated from the
.B /etc/skel
directory:

.EX
min-uid 1000
min-gid 1000
allow-groups remote 
skel /etc/skel
base dc=gnu,dc=org,dc=ua
filter (&(objectClass=posixAccount)(uid=$user))
pubkey-attr grayPublicKey
.EE
.TP
.B Addition to the LDAP schema:
The LDAP schema should include an attribute to keep the user public
keys.  The author uses the following schema:

.EX
# depends upon:
#    nis.schema

# Attribute Definitions
attributetype ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.9163.2.1.0 NAME 'grayPublicKey'
        DESC 'SSH public key'
        EQUALITY caseExactIA5Match
        SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.26 )
# Object Class Definitions
objectclass ( 1.3.6.1.4.1.9163.2.2.0 NAME 'grayAccount'
        DESC 'Abstraction of an employee account'
        SUP posixAccount AUXILIARY
        MUST ( cn $ uid $ uidNumber $ gidNumber $ homeDirectory )
        MAY ( userPassword $ loginShell $ gecos $ grayPublicKey ) )
.EE
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpam_ldaphome\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

