.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.so config.so
.TH PAM_FSHADOW 8 "March 30, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pam_fshadow \- use alternative passwd and/or shadow files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpam_fshadow\fR\
 [\fBbasic\fR|\fBextended\fR]\
 [\fBignore\-case\fR|\fBicase\fR|\fBcase\fR]\
 [\fBnopasswd\fR]\
 [\fBnoshadow\fR]\
 [\fBregex=\fIEXPR\fR]\
 [\fBrevert\-index\fR]\
 [\fBsysconfdir=\fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fBuse_authtok\fR]\
 [\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]]\
 [\fBwaitdebug\fR]\
 [\fBaudit\fR]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Authenticates the user against alternative \fBpasswd\fR and
\fBshadow\fR files.  There are two operation modes:
\fBplain\fR mode, in which the module uses only
one \fBpasswd\fR,\fBshadow\fR pair, and \fBvirtual domain\fR mode,
which selects the pair to use based depending on the authentication
token (the user name).
.PP
In plain mode, \fBpam_fshadow\fR checks the supplied user name and
authentication token against the \fBpasswd\fR and \fBshadow\fR files
located in the system configuration directory.  The latter is set when
configuring the package and defaults to \fB\*(ET\fR.  Its
location can be changed using the \fBsysconfdir\fR command line
parameter.
.PP
The command line options \fBnopasswd\fR and \fBnoshadow\fR are
provided to disable reading of either file.  E.g. if \fBnoshadow\fR is
given, the module will expect all authentication information to be
stored in the \fBpasswd\fR file.
.PP
The \fBvirtual domain\fR mode select the \fBpasswd\fR,\fBshadow\fR
pair to use depending on the user name.  To that effect, the user name
is first split into the \fBlocal\fR and \fBauthentication domain\fR
parts using a regular expression supplied with the \fBregex\fR option.
The configuration directory name is then constructed by concatenating the
system configuration directory, a directory separator character (\fB/\fR),
and the name of the authentication domain.   The authentication then
proceeds as described above for the plain mode.  If the supplied user name
does not match the regular expression, \fBpam_fshadow\fR falls back to
the plain mode.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fBbasic\fR
The argument to the \fBregex\fR option is a basic regular expression. 
.TP
\fBextended\fR
The argument to the \fBregex\fR option is a POSIX extended regular
expression.  This is the default.
.TP
\fBignore\-case\fR, \fBicase\fR
Use case-insensitive regex matching.
.TP
Use case-sensitive regex matching (default).
.TP
\fBnopasswd\fR
Use only \fBshadow\fR file for authentication.
.TP
\fBnoshadow\fR
Use only \fBpasswd\fR file for authentication.
.TP
\fBregex=\fIEXPR\fR
Defines a regular expression for splitting user name into the proper
name and authentication domain.  The expression must contain two
parentesized groups.  If it matches, the group 1 will be used to
extract local user name and the group 2 will select the authentication
domain.  The \fBrevert\-index\fR option changes this behavior, causing
group 1 to be used for authentication domain and group 2 for user
name.  For example:
.RS
.EX
regex=(.*)@(.*)
.EE
.RE

This regular expression will match user names like \fBsmith@domain\fR.
.TP
\fBrevert\-index\fR
Use group #2 from the regular expression as the user name and group #1
as the authentication domain. 
.TP
\fBsysconfdir=\fIDIR\fR
Use \fIDIR\fR as the system configuration directory, instead of the
default \fB\*(ET\fR.
.TP
\fBuse_authtok\fR
Do not prompt the user for password, take it from the saved
authentication tokens.
.TP
\fBdebug\fR\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]
Set debugging level (0 <= \fINUMBER\fR <= 100).
.TP
\fBwaitdebug\fR
Wait for \fIN\fR seconds before starting up.  This option is intended
to facilitate attaching to the module with
.BR gdb (1).
It is available only if the package was configured with
the \fB\-\-enable\-debug\fR option.
.TP
\fBaudit\fR
Log full debugging information (equivalent to \fBdebug=100\fR).
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
.BR auth ,
.BR session ,
.BR account .
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_SUCCESS
Successful return.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTH_ERR
Authentication failed.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTHINFO_UNAVAIL
The input information is not sufficient.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTHTOK_RECOVER_ERR
Failed to obtain stored authentication token.  This code can be
returned if \fBuse_authtok\fR was used.
.TP
.B PAM_SERVICE_ERR
Can't open \fBpasswd\fR or \fBshadow\fR file, or get username or
password.
.TP
.B PAM_USER_UNKNOWN
Supplied username not found.
.TP
.B PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
Out of memory.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
Plain mode.  Use the file \fB/etc/ftpauth/shadow\fR for authentication.
.PP
.EX
auth required pam_fshadow.so sysconfdir=/etc/ftpauth nopasswd
.EE
.IP \n+[step].
Authenticate against files located in \fB/etc/authdomain\fR.  E.g. if the
supplied user name were \fBsmith@ftp\fR, it would use the files
.B /etc/authdomain/ftp/passwd
and
.BR /etc/authdomain/ftp/shadow :
.PP
auth required pam_fshadow.so sysconfdir=/etc/authdomain regex=(.*)@(.*) 
.PP
.EX
.EE
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpam_fshadow\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8),
.BR regex (7).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

