.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.so config.so
.TH PAM_MYSQL 8 "April 2, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pam_mysql \- authenticate using a MySQL database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpam_mysql\fR [\fBconfig=\fIFILE\fR]\
 [\fBuse_authtok\fR]\
 [\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]]\
 [\fBwaitdebug\fR]\
 [\fBaudit\fR]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Provides authentication and account management services via a MySQL
database.
.PP
When used in the \fBauth\fR stack, the module first connects to the
database using credentials supplied in the configuration file (see
below).  Then, it retrieves the value of the \fBpasswd\-query\fR
configuration parameter and performs \fBPAM\fR item expansion over
it.  The resulting query is sent to the \fBSQL\fR server.  If this
query produces a non-empty result, the first column from the first
tuple is used as encrypted user password and is compared with the
supplied authentication token.  If it matches, the user is
authenticated successfully.  The comparison includes the following
checks, performed in that order until one of them returns match or the
list is exhausted: 
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
Compare the retrieved password with the result of the system
.BR crypt (3)
function called with the authentication token and retrieved password
as its arguments
.IP \n+[step].
Encrypt the authentication token using the
.B MySQL
password encoding algorithm and compare the result with the retrieved
password.
.IP \n+[step].
Compare password with the MD5 sum of the authentication token.
.IP \n+[step].
Assume the password is encrypted using the
.BR LDAP -style
encoding and compare it accordingly.
.IP \n+[step].
Compare both strings literally.  This check is performed only if
the
.B allow\-plaintext\-pass
configuration parameter is set.
.PP
Any of these checks can be disabled using the corresponding
configuration setting.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration information is supplied in a file
.BR \*(ET/pam_sql.conf .
An alternative location can be given via the \fBconfig\fR command line
option.  The file is a usual UNIX-style configuration file with
comments introduced by the \fB#\fR character.  Long statements can be
split across several physical lines of text by ending each line but
the last with a backslash character. 
.PP
The following statements are defined.
.SS Database connection configuration
.TP
.BI host " NAME"
Sets hostname or IP address of the MySQL server.

If the database is listening on the local socket, the \fINAME\fR
is the pathname of the local socket.
.TP
.BI port " NUMBER"
Sets the MySQL port number.  The default value is 3306.
.TP
.BI db " NAME"
Sets the database name.
.TP
.BI login " NAME"
Sets the database user name.  The user must have \fBSELECT\fR
privileges on tables in the authentication database.
.TP
.BI pass " TEXT"
Sets password for database access.
.SS Queries
These statements define \fBSQL\fR queries used by the module.  The
argument of each statement is subject to
.BR "PAM item expansion" ,
which is described in detail in the following section.
.TP
.BI passwd\-query " QUERY"
Defines \fBSQL\fR query to be used to obtain the user's password from the
database.
.TP
.BI session\-start\-query " QUERY"
Defines \fBSQL\fR query to be executed on session start.
.TP
.BI session\-stop\-query " QUERY"
Defines \fBSQL\fR query to be executed on session termination.
.TP
.BI setenv\-query " QUERY"
This query is available when the package is compiled with
.B Linux PAM
implementation.  The data it selects from the database are then
stored in the \fBPAM\fR environment.  Only the first tuple returned
is used; the column names are treated as environment variable names,
and column values as their values. 
.SS Password encryption
The variables in this subsections control how the module treats
passwords returned by the 
.BR passwd\-query .
Their argument is a boolean value: \fByes\fR, \fBtrue\fR or \fBt\fR,
for true value and \fBno\fR, \fBfalse\fR or \fBf\fR, for false value.
.TP
.BI allow\-plaintext\-pass " BOOL"
Controls whether the
.B passwd\-query
may return a plaintext password.
.TP
.BI allow\-ldap\-pass " BOOL"
The returned password may be a
.BR LDAP -style
password hash, i.e. the hash value encoded as base-64 and prefixed
with a hashing algorithm name in curly braces.  This variable is
\fBtrue\fR by default. 
.TP
.BI allow\-md5-pass " BOOL"
The returned password may be encrypted using \fBMySQL md5\fR
function.
.TP
.BI allow\-mysql\-pass " BOOL"
The returned password may be encrypted using \fBMySQL password\fR
function.
.SH PAM ITEM EXPANSION
The query strings described in the previous section are subject to
item expansion prior to being sent to the \fBMySQL\fR server.  This
feature is similar to the shell variable expansion.  During item
expansion, any occurrence of \fB$\fINAME\fR is replaced with the
actual value of the \fBPAM\fR item \fINAME\fR.  If the item in
question is not defined, an empty string is substituted instead.  A
limited support for the shell-style default values is available:
namely, the notation \fB${\fIITEM\fB:-\fIVALUE\fB}\fR expands to the
value of \fBITEM\fR if it is set, and to \fIVALUE\fR otherwise.
Notice, that \fIVALUE\fR must be a literal value (string or numeric).
.PP
The following table lists valid \fBPAM\fR item names:
.TP
.B service
.BR PAM_SERVICE .
The service name (identifies the \fBPAM\fR stack that will be used).
.TP
.B user
.BR PAM_USER .
The username of the entity under whose identity service will be given.
.TP
.B tty
.BR PAM_TTY .
The terminal name: prefixed by \fB/dev/\fR if it is a device file; for
graphical, X-based, applications the value for this item is usually
the \fB$DISPLAY\fR environment variable. 
.TP
.B rhost
.BR PAM_RHOST .
The requesting hostname (the hostname of the machine
from which the \fBPAM_RUSER\fR entity is requesting service).  That is
\fBPAM_RUSER@PAM_RHOST\fR identifies the requesting user.  In some
applications, \fBPAM_RHOST\fR may be \fBNULL\fR.
.TP
.B ruser
.BR PAM_RUSER .
The requesting entity: user's name for a locally requesting user or a
remote requesting user.  In some cases, \fBPAM_RUSER\fR may be \fBNULL\fR.
.TP
.B prompt
.BR PAM_USER_PROMPT .
The string used when prompting for a user's name.  The default value
for this string is:
.sp
.nh
.na
.B Please enter username: 
.ad
.hy
.TP
.B password
.BR PAM_AUTHTOK .
The authentication token (often a password).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI config= FILE
Read configuration from \fIFILE\fR instead of
.BR \*(ET/pam_sql.conf .
.TP
\fBuse_authtok\fR
Do not prompt the user for password, take it from the saved
authentication tokens.
.TP
\fBdebug\fR\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]
Set debugging level (0 <= \fINUMBER\fR <= 100).
.TP
\fBwaitdebug\fR
Wait for \fIN\fR seconds before starting up.  This option is intended
to facilitate attaching to the module with
.BR gdb (1).
It is available only if the package was configured with
the \fB\-\-enable\-debug\fR option.
.TP
\fBaudit\fR
Log auditing information.
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
.BR auth ,
.BR session .
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_SUCCESS
Successful termination
.TP
.B PAM_AUTH_ERR
Authentication failed.
.TP
.B PAM_USER_UNKNOWN
Supplied username not found.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTHTOK_RECOVER_ERR
Failed to obtain stored authentication token.  This code can be
returned if \fBuse_authtok\fR was used.
.TP
.B PAM_SERVICE_ERR
Some configuration or internal module error: required configuration
parameter is missing, etc.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Simple authentication
This example assumes the authentication table of the following
structure:
.PP
.EX
CREATE TABLE auth (
   user char(32),
   passwd char(128),
   PRIMARY KEY (user_name)
);
.PP
The configuration file will look like:
.PP
.EX
# Authentication data
host localhost
db userdb
login test
pass guessme
# Retrieve password from the database.
passwd-query SELECT passwd\\
             FROM auth\
             WHERE user='${user}'
.EE
.SS Accounting
This example assumes the accounting table of the following structure:
.PP
.EX
CREATE TABLE acct (
  type int,        -- 0 for active session, 1 for a terminated one
  user char(32),   -- user name
  host char(256),  -- remote host name
  tty char(16),    -- tty name
  service char(32),-- PAM service name
  ts  datetime,    -- timestamp
  duration int,    -- duration of the session if type==1
  primary key (user,host,service,tty)
);  
.EE
.PP
The correspondig configuration statements (without the database
credentials part) are:
.EX
session-start-query INSERT INTO acct\\
                    (type, user, service, tty, host, ts)\\
                    VALUES(0, $user, $service, $tty, $rhost, now())
session-stop-query  UPDATE acct\\
                    SET type=1, duration=now()-ts\\
                    WHERE user='$user'\\
                      AND host='$host'\\
                      AND service='$service'\\
                      AND tty='$tty'
.EE
.SS Setting the Environment
This example assumes the following table structure:
.PP
.EX
CREATE TABLE userprop (
  user varchar(32),
  dir varchar(128),
  uid int,
  gid int
);
.EE
.PP
The following 
.B setenv\-query
statement will set the \fBPAM\fR environment variables
.BR home ,
.BR uid ", and"
.BR gid :
.PP
.EX
setenv-query SELECT dir as home, uid, gid\\
             FROM userprop\\
             WHERE username='$user'
.EE
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpam_mysql\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam_pgsql (8),
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

