.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH PAM_GROUPMEMBER 8 "May 6, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pam_groupmember \- test group membership
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpam_groupmember\fR\
 \fBgroups=\fIGROUPLIST\fR\
 [\fBsense=\fISENSE\fR]\
 [\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]]\
 [\fBwaitdebug\fR]\
 [\fBaudit\fR]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Tests if the user is member of at least one group from
\fIGROUPLIST\fR.  \fIGROUPLIST\fR is a comma-separated list of
group names or IDs (numbers prefixed with a plus sign).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fBgroups=\fIGROUPLIST\fR
Defines a list of groups to check against.  \fIGROUPLIST\fR is a
comma-separated list of group names.  A group name prefixed with a
plus sign is treated as GID number.
.TP
\fBsense=allow\fR|\fBdeny\fR
What to do if the user name matches the expression given by the
\fBregex\fR option.  The value \fBallow\fR (the default) instructs the
module to return \fBPAM_SUCCESS\fR, the \fBdeny\fR instructs it to
return \fBPAM_AUTH_ERR\fR.
.TP
\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]
Set debugging level (0 <= \fINUMBER\fR <= 100).
.TP
\fBaudit\fR
Log full debugging information (equivalent to \fBdebug=100\fR).
.TP
\fBwaitdebug=\fIN\fR
Wait for \fIN\fR seconds before starting up.  This option is intended
to facilitate attaching to the module with
.BR gdb (1).
It is available only if the package was configured with
the \fB\-\-enable\-debug\fR option.
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
All module types (\fBaccount\fR, \fBauth\fR, \fBpassword\fR and
\fBsession\fR) are provided.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_SUCCESS
Successful return.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTH_ERR
Authentication failed.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTHINFO_UNAVAIL
The input information is not sufficient.
.TP
.B PAM_USER_UNKNOWN
Supplied username not found.
.SH EXAMPLES
auth required pam_groupmember.so groups=users,+80,ftp
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpam_groupmember\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

