.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH PAM_UMOTD 8 "April 2, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pam_umotd \- display a message of the day
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpam_umotd\fR [\fBfile=\fIFILENAME\fR]\
 [\fBtimeout=\fIN\fR]\
 [\fBmax\-size=\fIN\fR]\
 [\fBmax\-la=\fIN\fR]\
 [\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]]\
 [\fBwaitdebug\fR]\
 [\fBaudit\fR]\
 [\fBexec\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Displays a user-specific message of the day.  The text can be taken
either from a disk file, or read from the standard output of a program
launched for that purpose.

This module is Linux-specific.

\fBPam_umotd\fR is normally started as part of the \fBsession\fR stack.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fBfile=\fIFILENAME\fR
Read and display text from the file \fIFILENAME\fR.
.TP
.B exec
Execute a program and display its output.  The rest of arguments
after this parameter are taken to be the program name and its
command line arguments.  The arguments are subject to \fBitem
expansion\fR, during which any occurrence of \fB$\fINAME\fR is
replaced by the value of the \fBPAM\fR item \fINAME\fR.  A limited
support for the shell-style default values is available: namely, the
notation \fB${\fIITEM\fB:\-\fIVALUE\fB}\fR expands to the value of
\fIITEM\fR if it is set, and to \fIVALUE\fR otherwise.  Notice, that
\fIVALUE\fR must be a literal value (string or numeric).  Valid item
names are:
.RS
.TP
.B service
.BR PAM_SERVICE .
The service name (identifies the \fBPAM\fR stack that will be used).
.TP
.B user
.BR PAM_USER .
The username of the entity under whose identity service will be given.
.TP
.B tty
.BR PAM_TTY .
The terminal name: prefixed by \fB/dev/\fR if it is a device file; for
graphical, X-based, applications the value for this item is usually
the \fB$DISPLAY\fR environment variable. 
.TP
.B rhost
.BR PAM_RHOST .
The requesting hostname (the hostname of the machine
from which the \fBPAM_RUSER\fR entity is requesting service).  That is
\fBPAM_RUSER@PAM_RHOST\fR identifies the requesting user.  In some
applications, \fBPAM_RHOST\fR may be \fBNULL\fR.
.TP
.B ruser
.BR PAM_RUSER .
The requesting entity: user's name for a locally requesting user or a
remote requesting user.  In some cases, \fBPAM_RUSER\fR may be \fBNULL\fR.
.TP
.B prompt
.BR PAM_USER_PROMPT .
The string used when prompting for a user's name.  The default value
for this string is \fBPlease enter username: \fR.
.TP
.B password
.BR PAM_AUTHTOK .
The authentication token (often a password).
.RE
.TP
\fBtimeout=\fIN\fR
Limit the execution time of the program started via the \fBexec\fR
option to \fBN\fR seconds.  The default value is 10.
.TP
.B
\fBmax\-size=\fIN\fR
Limit the output size to \fIN\fR bytes.  Default is 2000.
.TP
\fBmax\-la=\fID\fR
Exit immediately if the 5-minute load average is greater than or
equal to \fID\fR (a floating-point number).
.TP
\fBdebug\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\fR]
Set debugging level (0 <= \fINUMBER\fR <= 100).
.TP
\fBaudit\fR
Log full debugging information (equivalent to \fBdebug=100\fR).
.TP
\fBwaitdebug=\fIN\fR
Wait for \fIN\fR seconds before starting up.  This option is intended
to facilitate attaching to the module with
.BR gdb (1).
It is available only if the package was configured with
the \fB\-\-enable\-debug\fR option.
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
.B session
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_IGNORE
Ignore this module
.TP
.B PAM_SERVICE_ERR
Unable to read the file (if the \fBfile=\fR option is given) or
execute the program (if \fBexec\fR is given).
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
session optional pam_umotd.so file=/etc/motd
.EE
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpam_umotd\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

