.\" This file is part of PAM-Modules -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" PAM-Modules is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with PAM-Modules.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH PAMCK 1 "March 31, 2014" "PAM-MODULES" "Pam-Modules User Reference"
.SH NAME
pamck \- test PAM stack
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.na
\fBpamck\fR [\fB\-hv\fR] [\fB\-s\fR \fISERVICE\fR]\
 [\fB\-g\fR \fIGROUP\fR] \fIUSER\fR [\fIPASSWORD\fR]
.ad
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Tests the functionality of \fBPAM\fR stack.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print short help summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-v
Print program version and copyright information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fISERVICE\fR
Select service name to use.  Default group is \fBcheck\fR.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR \fIGROUP\fR
Select \fBPAM\fR management group to check.  Allowed arguments are:
.RS
.TP
.B auth
Authentication group.  Call \fBpam_authenticate\fR.
.TP
.B acct
Account management.  Call \fBpam_acct_mgmt\fR.
.TP
.B open
Session management.  Call \fBpam_open_session\fR.
.TP
.B close
Session management.  Call \fBpam_close_session\fR.
.TP
.B pass
Password management.  Call \fBpam_chauthtok\fR.
.RE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Successful termination.
.TP
.B 1
Invalid command line usage.
.TP
.B 2
\fBPAM\fR stack returned error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
Test if the user \fBsmith\fR can be authenticated using the
\fBcheck\fR service.  The program will ask for password interactively:
.PP
.EX
pamck smith
.EE
.IP \n+[step].
Same as above, but supply password on the command line:
.PP
.EX
pamck smith guessme
.EE
.IP \n+[step].
Check if the user \fBsmith\fR authenticates using the \fBftp\fR service.
.PP
.EX
pamck -s ftp smith
.EE
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBpamck\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR available in texinfo format.  If the \fBinfo\fR
reader and the tar documentation are properly installed on your
system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info pam-modules
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/pam-modules/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBPAM-modules Manual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5),
.BR pam (8).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff <gray@gnu.org>
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug\-pam\-modules@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2001-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

